---
layout: post
title:  Stressing, Brewing, Batman, Papers
tags:   blog life beer school
---
It's been as while since I've written. I always mean to write more but I seldom,
if ever, find something worth writing about. You see, my life hasn't changed too
terribly much - I'm still an overweight CS graduate student who drinks too
much and works too little.

Actually, I think I might be suffering from impostor syndrome. I'm doing well in
my classes, I'm starting in on research, and I've landed an research
assistantship for next semester. So long as I can figure out how to pay rent
this summer and replace my slowly-dying keyboard, I'm doing fantastically.

The only thing I'm really lacking is free time - I keep putting work off in
order to find some free time. But even that somehow isn't enough. I jumped in
the deep end and I constantly feel like I'm trying to break the surface of the
water for air. I get little sips but never a full breath - the tension never
stops, it just lulls almost long enough to regain my composure. I've got some
articles to read on the subject, though. Maybe one will help me.

In other news, Andy and I made more beer. The last batch, a nutty brown ale,
came out okay (though incredibly weak, and it's bottle conditioned itself almost
perfectly for St. Patrick's Day (with a nice flavor so there's a nice silver
lining. Our new batch is a Russian imperial stout. It's in the closet right now,
it's got an incredible original specific gravity (1.080, and it smells
wonderful. Assuming the yeast does its job, we'll get about 8% ABV - enough to
get well and smashed.

Making beer is a lot of fun and I think, even once Andy leaves, I'm going to
keep going. Maybe a new graduate student next year will become my new brewing
buddy - it really is a two-man job, if for the company more than anything else.
And it's fun to watch such a short-term project come to fruition and yield
something I really enjoy (beer.

The other thing I've taken to enjoying a ton recently is Batman comics. I, ahem,
acquired most of the Batman comics run. I have read about 20 from Legends and
I'm most of the way through Gotham Knights. The stories are enjoyable and so
purely, well, Batman.

I've watched a lot of Batman television shows and, of course, played the games,
but I have never gotten such a stark, continuous, and true-to-character look at
Batman. I don't know why I never thought to read them before - they're amazing.

On the topic of reading, I am going to start reading CS papers and writing about
them again (on bithacker. I took a break because of Dan Friedman's Advanced
Topics in Programming Languages (to avoid spoilers, but it's high time I get
back to doing what I need to as a successful graduate student.

And on the topic of papers, Rebecca recently submitted one to ICFP. She is, I
believe, the third author. But even so, getting' published! Well, the paper
hasn't been accepted, but it's been written and submitted and Ryan Newton has
some sweet street cred to that end.

I think that this post has now gone on long enough - I've provided a nice
write-up of how my life is going and now I'm going to go watch some X Files -
the show I think I'm gonna get into now.

