---
layout: post
title: ACM doesn't understand Open Access
tags: blog research open-access
---
The ACM recently posted an
[article](http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2013/2/160170-positioning-acm-for-an-open-access-future/fulltext)
with the slug line *"The age of open access is upon us. Increasingly, the
consensus of authors of research articles and their funding institutions is that
the fruits of taxpayer-supported research should be freely available to the
public."* 

This article was exciting! Open access is a fairly hot topic right now, and the
way that the ACM systematically locks up research in my field behind paywalls is
frustrating and flustering. (Luckily, my university is large enough to pay for
access to their publications, so if I absolutely must have a paper I can get it
on campus.)

The next paragraph, though, falls flat on its face. The authors make the claim
that maintaining ``large digital archives" for a long time "incur significant
cost". They describe an *alternative* payment plan to this end, proposing that
authors pay for these costs.

Ultimately, the ACM article proposes four ways for them to make money in order
to maintain these archives, which boil down to author payment, conference
payment, or, well, author and conference payment. The people they must pay for
are system administrators and web developers. And while these things cost money,
they are not impossible to pay for if you abandon paywalls.

For comparison, the Internet Archive group stores over ten petabytes of data.
Wikipedia has roughly twenty-nine *million* articles. These websites take
donations and keep their doors open, partially because not all of their pages
are served every month (or even every year). And those companies do fine. 

As for the ACM and ACM publications, here is a list of things that I think would
serve as a much better business model and that few, if any, researchers could
complain about:

1. *Asking for donations for the ACM Digital Library.* It works for plenty of
   other companies, and I can't imagine that a company as wide-reaching as the
   ACM would have trouble finding funding support from its members and users if
   it came with the promise of no more paywalls.

2. *Requiring that at least one author of each paper be a full ACM member.* This
   may seem a little like "pay to publish", but is distinctly different. It
   encourages membership in the premiere CS organization among its academic
   members while also ensuring that work published by the ACM is truly
   representative of its members (because its members wrote it).

3. *Offering premium services as part of the Digital Library*. The digital
   library lacks a slew of features that I'd greatly enjoy having, including author
   maps (large webs with links between authors that have published together,
   perhaps with sizes based on publication count), content tags for papers (perhaps
   with a similar web, and searching on tags), pages for conferences themselves
   (why does the ACM not more closely tie with its conferences), and possibly even
   links between follow-up papers for authors (it'd be great to know that the paper
   I'm reading from 2008 has further results presented in 2010). These are services
   worth *paying for*, and these premium accounts could go a long way toward
   running the ACM Digital Library. If the ACM Publication Board insists that
   hosting these papers is a service worth paying for, it should be.

4. *Charging a small overhead per paper published in conferences and
   journals in such a way that these costs may be folded into conference fees.*
   There were 42 papers published at POPL this last year. There were at least
   500 people in attendence. If each paid \$20 in conference fees toward
   publication, that would be \$10,000 toward hosting and maintaining the
   conference proceedings in the ACM Digital Library. And given the modern
   costs of webhosting, this should cover at least the next twenty years of
   hosting 42 PDFs.

If all of these solutions were implemented, I cannot imagine that the ACM would
need to continue with its paywall behavior (or at least *greatly* reduce costs).
Their arguments and justifications feel reminiscent of the MPAA and RIAA
arguments in favor of their failing business models as we move into the digital
age, and it's a google away to know how well it's working out for those
companies.

